Version 1.0 BCP EDN 1
INTEGRATED CARGO SYSTEM (ICS)
BUSINESS CONTINUITY PLAN (BCP)
EXPORT DECLARATION (EDN)
LODGEMENT OF CO NTINGENCY DATA
HELP GUIDE
Status:  Final
Version:  1.1
Date: March 2012
Classification:  Unclassified

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 2 Contents
1. Introduction        3  Electronic Processing of BCP Export Declarations Flowchart  4
2. Electronic Export Declaration (EDN) Quick Guide  5   Assistance with Contingency Files    6
3. Electronic Export Declarat ion (EDN) Detailed Guide  7
3.1  Contingency Folders     7 3.2.  Downloading the Contingency File   8
3.3.  Completing the Contingency File    12 3.3.1   Critical points fo r completing a .csv file  12
3.3.2   Filling in t he Contingency File    12
Multiple Line Export De claration Report File 17
3.4.  Naming the Contingency File
(File Naming Convention-EDN)  18
3.5.  Lodging the Conti ngency File    18
4. Hardcopy (paper) Contingency Forms -Export Declaration  19

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 3 1. Introduction
During a declared outage contingency Export Declarations will only be accepted and processed by Customs and Border Protection for cargo due to be delivered to cargo
or container terminals during the next 24 hours. Industry Clients are responsible for prioritising the submission of these documents.
This document contains two components. The first is a Quick Guide which clients
should refer to in the first instance and outlines the process required to complete a
contingency transaction in electronic form.
The second component is a Detailed Guide which provides guidance on how to:
• download and save contingency files from the Customs and Border Protection
website;
• complete mandatory and optional fields for the transaction type;
• correctly name the contingency file: and
• submit completed contingency transactions to Customs and Border Protection
for processing.
Electronic communication is the preferred option by Industry and Customs and
Border Protection for communicating contingency data. This method is effective, user
friendly, and provides a quick turnaround of cargo status.
Where contingency transactions cannot be submitted via electronic means, clients
may use Hardcopy (paper) forms.
Please note: In accordance with Secti on 126E of the Customs Act 1901,
recovery reports must be submitted to the Integrated Cargo System
(ICS) within 24 hours of the CEO of Customs causing notice to be given
that the system has become operative.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 4

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 5 2. Electronic Export Declaration (EDN) Quick Guide
¾  Download the “ Contingency Export Declaration ” file (refer to Section 3.2
for further information on downloading a contingency file).
¾  Enter the data in the required fields (refer to Section 3. 3 for further
detail).
Note that multiple entries can be made on the same CSV export
declaration file where those exports are being delivered to the same establishment – that is, the same “Port of Loading”.
When completing a multiple line contingency Export Declaration it
is critical that the senders reference is the same for each line
otherwise each line will be treated as a separate document (separate EDN).
¾  Save the file with a Naming Convention (refer to Section 3.4  for further
information)
¾  Attach the file to an email.
¾  The subject line for the email should be ‘Contingency Export
Declaration’
¾  Address the email to ICSBCP@customs.gov.au  and send to Customs
and Border Protection (refer to  Section 3.5  for further information on
how to submit a contingency file)
Customs and Border Protection will process the file and provide one of the following status results:   Contingency Number All cargo with a contingency number allocated can be presented for
export. For multi-line declarations a contingency number will be documented against each line. The contingency number will be in a similar format to the following: 1M07CEDN3560. ‘1M’ – is the state and port code;
‘07’ - is the year;
‘CEDN’ - is for contingency EDN; ‘3560’ - a consecutive serial number, generated by the BCP.
Held Cargo with “Held” status may not
be exported and is to be held
pending secondary actions by Customs and Border Protection or
AQIS.  The reporting party will be contacted by Customs and Border
Protection, where necessary, to process the “Held” status.  When secondary actions have been completed by Customs and Border Protection and the cargo is cleared for export, Customs and Border Protection will alter the “Held” status by allocating a contingency
number on the contingency file and will re-send to the reporting party.
Permit
Required Cargo with permit required status may not
be exported.  The
reporting party is to obtain a permit, update the contingency data and re-submit to Customs and Border Protection. The same sender’s
reference number is to be quoted as in the original submission.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 6
Assistance with Contingency Files
Note: All contingency files are to be forwarded to the BCP mailbox at
ICSBCP@customs.gov.au
All BCP queries or issues should be directed to the Customs Information and Support
Centre (CI & SC).
Email: cargosupport@customs.gov.au
Phone: 1300 558 099
Note: In the unlikely event of a situation arising where this mailbox is disabled
alternative email arrangements will be posted on the Cargo Support website.
.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 7 3. Electronic Export Declaration (EDN) Detailed Guide
3.1 Contingency Folders
1/. Go to http://www.cargosupport.gov.au, and then click on the menu item
titled ICS Business Continuity . The ICS business continuity screen will
display as per the following screenshot.
Home>Integrated Cargo System>ICS Business Continuity (BCP)
ics business continuity
ICS Business Continuity Plan
In the event of an ICS outage, ICS slow response times, IC S specific issues, and/or cli ent system problems it is
critical that industry be able to continue normal daily business with minimal disruption through alternate cargo
reporting procedures. A contingency peri od can be either when an ICS outage occurs or a client’s cargo system
outage occurs.
Customs and Border Protection, in partnership with I ndustry and AQIS has developed an Integrated Cargo System
(ICS) Business Continuity Plan (BCP).
ICS Business Continuity Plan
For general information on the ICS BCP, including  who to contact to find out more, refer to
Australian Customs Cargo Advice 2006, Number 27 .
What do I do in an outage?
Depending on the urgency of the cargo clearance you can decide whether to lodge a contingency file or wait for the
ICS problem to be resolved.
Note: All contingency files submitted to Customs and Border  Protection MUST be submitted in the ICS within 24hrs
of it becoming operational.
Refer to the following folders for detailed procedures to fo llow when submitting transacti ons for clearing cargo during
a contingency period. These folders also contain the electronic contingency file
IMPORT - ICS Import Business Continuity Folders
EXPORT - ICS Export Business Continuity Folders
Contacts
All contingency files should be emailed to the BCP Mailbox.
Email: ICSBCP@customs.gov.au
All other BCP queries or issues should be directed to  the Customs Information and Support Centre (CI & SC).
Email: cargosupport@customs.gov.au
Phone: 1300 558 099

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 8 2/. Click on Export – ICS Export Business Continuity Folders  Under the
heading Export Declaration (EDN ) there is a help guide and a link to
the contingency file.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 9 3.2 Downloading the Contingency File
The following steps outline how a client should download and save a contingency file.
Note:   This document provides a guide for users utilising Microsoft Internet Explorer
as their web browser. The process may differ slightly for users utilising other applications.
1/. Click on the Contingency Export Declaration (EDN) file . The File
Download dialogue box displays.
2/. Select Save
3/.
The Save As  screen will appear.
Select a folder location where you want to save the contingency file on your computer by using the drop down arrow next to the “ Save in ” field.
Before you Save  ensure that the file is saved in  Comma Separated
Value format (.csv).  The field should  automatically populate as a .csv
file.
The saved file will negate the need to download from the web source for
any subsequent contingency reports.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 10
If you create and save multiple reports in the same minute (i.e. At 12:35 pm for
example) you will be able to give the files separately referenced names according to
the naming convention e.g. EDN41000495269194647660.csv (refer to Section 3.4  for
further information) and save them in the same folder, or shared folder.  Quoting the time is not a set requirement as indicated in earlier help guides.
4/. Click on Save .
5/. Locate the contingency file and open it. The following screen will
display. (Note: example is using MSExcel).
6/. Select the box in the corner of the spreadsheet as shown below and highlight the
cells in the spreadsheet

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 11
7/. Right-click your mouse and select format cells .  Select  Text   and click OK
8/. Now the cells are formatted as text, enter the data into each of the fields as required
(refer to Section 3.3) .
9/. After the data has been entered,  Save the changes according to the file naming
conventions (refer to Section 3.4). Note.  The following prompt will appear when saving a spreadsheet in .csv format
using Microsoft Excel:
Select Yes
After the spreadsheet has been saved in .csv format, closing the file will result in
another prompt to save the file again as follows:
This does not mean the first “save” was unsuccessful.  This is a design feature of Excel allowing the user to save the file in a different format if required. Select No.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 12 3.3 Completing the Contingency File
3.3.1. Critical Points for comple ting Microsoft excel spreadsheets saved
in comma separated value format (.csv).
All contingency files used for the Customs and Border Protection BCP are Microsoft
excel spreadsheets saved in comma separated value format  (.csv).  Please
ensure you do not add any formatting to the spreadsheets prior to forwarding
them to Customs and Border Protection.   This will ultimately result in the data
being corrupted and the file will not be processed.
• File completion;
o Fill in each mandatory  field.
o Repeat information across each line if a multiple line file, ie each
mandatory field is fully completed down the column and across the row, “no dittos ”.
o Save as an excel .csv file , in text format .
3.3.2 Filling in the Export Decl aration (EDN) contingency file
The following procedure outlines how a client should complete an Export Declaration contingency file.
Note.  An Export Declaration file should not contain any more than 1000 lines.
1/. Locate the contingency Export Declaration (EDN) file  from the
Export - ICS Export Business Continuity Folders on the  ICS
Business Continuity page or open the file from the location it is saved
as per steps in Section 3.2. The file will open as an excel spreadsheet.
2/. Select the cell underneath each field to complete, using the tab button or
arrow to navigate between fields. Do not leave blank rows or empty mandatory cells.
3/. Complete all fields according to the table below. Note: To assist in the
compilation of the spreadsheet the MANDATORY fields are indicated by the column headers in CAPITALS and conditional or optional fields are in lower case.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 13   FIELD NAME BCP BUSINESS REQUIREMENT BUSINESS RULE FIELD DEFINITIONS  DATA EXAMPLES DATA TYPE FIELD SIZE
1 Reporting Party
Name Mandatory   The business name or
owner name of the
Customs Client who is
responsible for the
document being
lodged. Australian Customs text 70
2 Reporting Party
ID Mandatory   A valid Australian
Business Number
(ABN) or Customs
Client Identifier
(CCID). 12345678901 text 11
3 Email Mandatory Email address must
be provided.
Status messages
will be sent to this
email address Valid Email address of
the reporting party. BCP@customs.gov.au text 70
4 Senders Ref Mandatory Each unique
senders reference
identifies the entire
EDN The Senders Reference
is a unique business-
level reference number
assigned by the
document owner. BCP001 text 35
5 MAWB/Ocean
Bill Optional Use if the EDN is
for consigned goods
that have a Master
Air Waybill or
Ocean bill of Lading
as part of the
unique identifier
and the MAWB or
OBOL number is
known.  Leave
blank if not
applicable or
unknown The Master Air Waybill
is the reference
assigned by the carrier
or their agent to the
transport document.
This refers to the total
consignment. The
Ocean Bill of Lading is
a document signed and
delivered by the
Master of a Ship to the
consignor.  A
document of title and a
receipt for goods. (MAWB) - "99912345678"
or OBOL - "Ocean001" text 35

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 14 6 HAWB/House
Bill Optional Use if the EDN is
for consigned goods
that have a House
Air Waybill or
House bill of Lading
as part of the
unique identifier
and the HAWB or
OBOL number is
known.  Leave
blank if not
applicable or
unknown House Air Waybill is
the reference assigned
by the carrier or their
agent to the transport
document. This refers
to a part of a total
consignment.  The
House Bill of Lading is
the Bill of Lading
equivalent issued by
the forwarding Freight
Forwarder. House01 text 35
7 Goods Owner
Name Mandatory   The business name or
owner name used to
identify the owner of
the goods, required if
an agent is lodging the
declaration on behalf
of the owner,
otherwise input the
owner name of the
party reporting the
declaration. Mr John Doe text 35
8 Goods Owner ID Optional   An identifier used to
identify the owner of
the goods, required if
an agent is lodging the
declaration on behalf
of the owner,
otherwise the Party
Reporting is assumed
to be the owner. This
can be either an
Australian Business
Number (ABN) or
Customs Client
Identifier (CCID) 12345678901 text 11
9 Consignee Mandatory   Entity defined in a
cargo report to whom
a consignment will be
delivered. Mr John Doe text 35

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 15 10 Final Dest
Country Code Mandatory   The ISO code for the
final country of
destination of the
goods. NZ text 2
11 Intended Date
of Export Mandatory Universal Co-
ordinated Time
(UTC) in the format
YYYYMMDD Date the goods are
intended to be
exported. 20070605 text 8
12 Mode of
Transport Mandatory   The code for the type
of transport used for
cargo. "AIR", "SEA", or "OTH" text 3
13 Flight No/Vessel
ID Conditional Leave blank if
unknown or
unavailable For AIR the Flight
Number is the unique
reference identifying a
specific journey of an
aircraft including the
Airline Code.  For Sea
the Voyage Number is
the Principal Agent's
Voyage Number. "CC001" (AIR), "22S" (SEA) text 8
14 AHECC Mandatory   The Australian
Harmonised Export
Commodity
Classification Code, as
provided by the
Australian Bureau of
Statistics, which
classifies a particular
type of export
commodity. 85232903 text 8
15 Goods
Description Mandatory   Plain language
description of the
nature of the goods
sufficient to identify
the goods at the level
required for transport,
banking, Customs
classification or
statistical purposes. Timber Doors text 128

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 16 16 Permit Number Optional Leave blank if
permit number is
not applicable to
the AHECC Code Relates to a
permission/licence to
export certain goods.
Permits are issued by
those Agencies that
have responsibility for
maintaining
export/import
controls/restrictions in
respect of regulated
commodities. DED.AAA1111123456789 text 35
17 FOB line value Mandatory   The cost of the goods,
including freight costs
and other charges,
incurred in placing
goods on board the
vessel or aircraft at the
place of export.
(S.154(1) CA refers.)   3000 text 15
18 Port of Loading Mandatory   The UNlocode of the
port where the goods
will be or have been
loaded onto a vessel or
aircraft for export. AUSYD text 5
19 Voyage Number Conditional Use if the goods are
departing by sea
and the voyage
number is known.
Leave blank if
unknown or not
applicable The Voyage Number is
the Principal Agent's
Voyage Number. 8 text 6

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 17
Multiple Line Export Declaration Report File
A single contingency export declaration report file can be used to report multiple
export declarations.  Each row in the spreadsheet can be used to report a separate export declaration.
When completing a multiple line contingency export declaration it is critical  that the
senders reference
is the same for each line if the line relates to a single declaration
otherwise each line will be treated as a separate document (separate EDN).
Status will be applied to each separate line in the multiple line report. When one line of a declaration is applied a “held” status then ALL lines in the report for that declaration will be “held” and the goods cannot be presented for export.
Where all lines are applied with a contingency number then the same
contingency
number will be applied to all lines providing the senders reference is the same on each line.
Where lines quote a different senders reference, a different contingency number will
be applied.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 18
3.4 Naming the Contingency File  (File Naming Convention -
EDN)
The BCP database will accept various alpha/numeric characters in the name as long
as:
1. The prefix for Export Declarations (EDNs) is EDN 2. The spreadsheet file is saved as a comma separated value (.csv) file in TEXT
format.
3. The number of alpha/numeric characters in the reference can vary between 0
and 70
4. There are no spaces or wildcard characters in the name, e.g.
• EDN41000495269194647660.csv,
Reporting Party ID and Time are only suggested references . You can include any
reference or number between the prefix and file extension.
File naming structure with mandatory sections in bold.
Transaction  Naming convention
Export Declaration EDN  + (Your Reporting Party ID OR chosen reference ) +
File extension
e.g. EDN 3587912NNN112D. csv
3.5 Lodging the Contingency File
Once you have completed filling out the contingency file you need to send the
completed file to Customs and Border Prot ection by completing the following steps.
Step 1 Create a new email.
Step 2 In the “To” field enter ICSBCP@customs.gov.au
Step 3 In the “Subject” field enter the name of the contingency transaction as
per the following:
• Contingency Export Declaration
Step 4 In the “Body” insert the completed contingency file or add as an
attachment.
Step 5 Click on the “Send” option.

Version 1.0 BCP EDN 19
4. Hardcopy (paper) Continge ncy Forms - Export Declaration
(EDN)
Hardcopy (paper) contingency data will continue to be accepted but it is noted that
the success of the BCP is reliant on electronic communication of contingency data. Hardcopy forms can only be lodged in person at Customs counters – refer Attachment A of the ICS Business Continuity Plan for locations of Customs counters in the regions. Faxed and mailed contingency data will not be accepted.
Contingency hardcopy (paper) transactions can generally be lodged at Customs
counters between the hours of 0900 to 1700 (local port time) – Monday to Friday  Prior to using Hardcopy (paper) forms clients must seek permission from Customs and Border Protection (via the Customs Information and Support Centre – 1300 558
099) who will then make arrangements for clients to present these contingency
transactions at a Customs and Border Protection counter. For more information please refer to Section 42 the ICS BCP
.
Contingency export declaration (B325)
To be completed and lodged by exporters or customs brokers in replacement of an ICS electronic export
declaration. Contingency export declarations will only  be accepted and processed by Customs for cargo
due to be delivered to cargo or container terminals during the next 24 hours.
Hardcopy contingency data processing only applies to the following reports
• Export Declaration
• Certificate of Clearance
• Export Sub Manifest.
• Impending Arrival
• Actual Arrival
• Underbond movement/transhipment
• Import Declaration
Please Note: Contingency Cargo Reports are not permitted as a hard copy process.